If the text is small on some of these slides and you
want to follow along, or you want some spoilers, you can get
the slides locally.
I also just posted the link on my account.
Yeah, thanks everybody for coming.
I'm going to jump right in.
I'm Fig or Phil.
You might know me as a bad example.
And last year when I was here, I had shipped Constell
ation.
And since then, I've done a few other things.
This talk is about community infrastructure and specifically small scale community infrastructure.
And I was trying to think about how to define that scope.
And I couldn't, like there's some obvious things that I
wanted to say.
And like for the purpose of this talk, I ended up just
settling on things that's kind of weird that you can just
do.
App Proto has a lot of this, but I'm just
going to be talking about it in the context of small scale
infra.
You can relay the whole firehose yourself just as like
a random person.
And that's like kind of weird.
I think Twitter had open access to a firehose early
on.
And that was like really wild.
App Proto lets you run the firehose yourself in
a much, much more powerful way.
And on a full network scale, like Blue Sky, a major social
media company could use my relay for the day if they wanted.
And there's a lot of reason they wouldn't.
But those reasons are not that it wouldn't work.
It would actually like everything, you wouldn't notice a difference.
You can also just index everything.
So that's Constellation.
Every single social interaction is a backlink in App Proto.
And all of those go into my house, into my living room.
And this googly-eyed Raspberry Pi takes note of them.
I'm going to talk a little bit about Constellation.
It's really simple.
So I made this diagram that makes it look really complicated.
The firehose comes in with all the posts and blocks
and likes and everything that's happening on the network called records.
Constellation opens each of those up and searches through for
anything that looks like a link.
And it doesn't matter what type it is.
If something looks like a link, it will take note of where
it came from.
And then just sort of put those in buckets of backlinks.
So you can say, what are all the replies to this post?
And Constellation can tell you because it's indexed
a bucket of replies to every single post that's ever happened
that you can just ask about.
So Rudy mentioned the follower counts that are really important to everybody.
And this is an example of where you need that kind of
aggregation across the network to be able to just show this
number on someone's profile.
So that's something that you can get from Blue Sky.
Their sort of like server backend has an API that can get
you lots of information about the profile, including doing this kind of
network aggregation of everybody that follows Sharpie.
You just give it their identity and you say get profile and
you get an answer back.
So the same thing with Constellation.
You have to give it sort of one more thing, which is
like, where are the links coming from?
So in this case, we're asking about follows.
And within a follow record, the link to define a follow is
the subject of the follow.
And then Constellation will kind of give you exactly the
same kind of information, but in a generic general purpose way that
's not specific to Blue Sky, works for every app, Proto
app.
People use it.
And people use it a lot more recently as well, which I
'll come back to in a second.
This is all pretty low cost to run because it's running
on Raspberry Pi at my house.
So something like spores.
garden, when you have it show you the series of steps
that one of your mushroom spores has, or whatever it is,
has like gotten to you, it will reach out to my living
room, Cassiopeia up there, and it will tell them.
There's a problem with this, which is my internet is from
an internet service provider that gives me a dynamic IP address.
And there's also just one Raspberry Pi.
And if it crashes then a lot of apps have issues.
So, I had a support to buy this little
micro PC that runs a hot failover, also at my house.
And if the Raspberry Pi has any issues, then we just fail
over to the secondary instance.
So, we have like a little bit of redundancy failover
happening here.
I also don't actually really want to put my even dynamic
IP directly on the internet.
So, I have this little $5 a month cloud server V
PS that acts as a reverse proxy, gives me some nice things,
like I do TLS termination there, caching and rate
limiting, and then it's just the upstream configuration in NG
INX over tail scale to get to my house and I
don't have to worry about dynamic IPs.
So, we're at $5 a month to do this.
But we also have a new single point of failure, which is
that $5 a month VPS that needs to be updated
and restarted and stuff from time to time.
So, we do the same thing.
I put one on DigitalOcean and one on Vulture,
so Constellation can survive an entire platform-wide outage
on DigitalOcean if it goes down, as long as V
ulture and DigitalOcean don't go down at the same
time.
How do you load balance in front of that?
It's not a load balancer for reasons that if anybody
wants to talk about, we can talk about after.
But for the moment, it's just DNS-based load balancing, which
in practice with two instances works really well.
DNS is pretty reliable, but I guess I would get taken down
by a DNS outage.
And things just kind of like automatically fail over between them.
So, this is up to $10 a month now for Const
ellation.
Running at home still has challenges.
Last summer, the fiber connection to my house was cut at the
distribution box accidentally, presumably.
And so, I was able at the time to like tether
over cellular for a couple days until a tech could come out
to fix it.
I don't think at the current scale of use that would
actually work.
But I'm looking at maybe getting a cable secondary internet connection.
I had a power outage in January that was longer than
my battery backup UPS runtime.
So, we had a one-hour downtime of Constellation for
that.
But it's very cheap to do all this, and it's
very low-tech.
And the thing that I like about low-tech is that nothing
really goes wrong generally.
And when they do, they're usually really easy to figure out
what's going on and debug.
And I guess just in case anybody's still worried about this,
like running at my house, there's also public backups of the
Constellation database that are pushed every four hours to object
storage.
You can get it yourself and restore a full copy of Const
ellation to run if you want.
And it also means that if something catastrophic happens at my house,
I can be back up in the cloud within some hours.
But I don't have to pay for that in the meantime
other than the object storage.
We're going to get out of Microcosm specific
in a second, but I did want to just kind of follow
Constellation a little further than I did last year, which
is that it's only storing the links.
It's not storing any like record contents from Constellation.
So, when you ask for all the replies to a post, you
might get like this thread of many responses, but you have to
go and fetch each of those individually to render a UI like
this.
And in the protocol, we have get record sync or repo versions.
And if the PDS has that record is offline, then you
might be in luck if you put your request through Slings
hot, which is an edge record cache.
It keeps a cache of the firehose and then a
cache of requested identities and records from them so that you have
much faster responses for get record.
And if it's in the cache, then you don't need
to worry about availability.
And you can also proxy your request Constellation through
Slingshot and have it hydrate everything on this way
out.
So, you can do one single request to get that thread UI
fully hydrated on the way out.
Rudy mentioned like record hydration is just that one above the water
thing of building it up to you.
And I don't want to pretend that I'm saying anything
otherwise, but I think this can get you pretty far.
I'm going to just show
these two graphs from data that I pulled yesterday from another micro
cosm service called UFOs, which tracks some statistics about every
lexicon that comes through the firehose.
I think this one might surprise some people given how much hype
there is around the atmosphere.
The top of that y-axis is 15,000 unique people.
We've never broken 15,000 unique people using non-blue sky
apps within a week.
It's small.
It's early.
And like the trend from like after the conference last year for
most of the year was not exciting.
I don't actually, I didn't have time to figure out
what this one spike was earlier, but I do want to just
like point to that last kind of two or three months at
the end there that kind of corresponded to the rise that
I have in stuff using microcosm.
The orange one with question marks is there because that's actually
only one day of the weekly bucket.
So this bucket is still rising up.
And I, and I think, I think this kind of more recent
thing.
Yeah.
Oh, nice.
Nice.
Awesome.
Yeah.
These charts kind of show something interesting together, like these two, which
are basically the same thing versus the one on the last slide,
which is that even though uptake among users has been slow,
uptake among developers has been steady.
And I think that's why this like lag and now we
're seeing the growth.
Like I, I think it's early.
I don't think these are actually pessimistic slides.
But yeah, so more than 10 weekly active users using a given
lexicon or data type bucketed, we've got like,
you know, almost 80 of them now, lexicon groups that
have more than 10 people using them at least one time in
a week.
Okay.
I'm doing okay on time.
I think so I'm going to say this part.
I said I would talk about economics.
It's kind of boring, but end of 2025, I pulled some
numbers and I was getting around $200 after fees from people
sponsoring me on GitHub and Ko-Fi or coffee or however you
say it, which with some of the more expensive cloud servers for
Slingshot and stuff netted me about $33 a
month.
I'm getting rich.
I've gotten some grants that have helped.
Shout out Haifa, who gave me a really generous donation recently.
And UpCloud sponsored a lot of the PLC stuff I
was doing for hosting.
I'm going to be building Hubble soon, which has come with
a grant from Blue Sky and will come with operating expenses for
the year I have to run it.
I don't know how much it's going to cost yet,
because I haven't built it.
But in 2024, running the close comparable existing thing wasn't cheap.
Since I mentioned relays, so we had that $153
a month in 2024.
Last year at the conference, there was somebody trying to run $
2 million to run a relay.
We can skip past that.
Future ran it on a Raspberry Pi after that because non-arch
ival relays, so not what I'm doing with Hubble, are
cheap.
I got one up in the cloud for $30 a month
the month after that.
Got it down to $18 on a different provider.
Brian did it for $34 a month and wrote it up
in a nice post.
And last month, I got one working on a under $5
a month VPS.
The network is growing, but it
's weird that you can just run infra pretty affordably.
These are some other ways I think I might be able to
make money and some ideas.
But this is actually what I want to get to, which is,
I don't know, why do people do weird things in App
Proto?
I didn't think my answers alone would be very interesting.
I reached out to 10 people that are running relays or
APIs or other things on a very small scale.
And I got 10 responses back.
Shout out to all those people, some in this room.
Thank you.
And yeah, I realized that I had never asked any of them
why they do it, and I didn't really know.
So I tried to consolidate some of those answers here.
A lot of people do it for fun, to learn things, or
they needed something for themselves and decided to open it up, or
to show what's possible.
These were like recurring themes.
I think
some of the real idealism came out in these.
I think this is the best chance we've had in a
long time to make this social internet more independent for the few
mostly evil big tech companies.
I asked people how they pay for it.
Almost 100% out of pocket at this kind of like small
scale, which I guess makes sense.
But people do that by running things cheap.
Some people, one person did it out of pocket because they can
't accept money or grants due to work or other reasons.
GitHub and CoFi support to do this kind of stuff is
a huge recurring theme across everybody that answered this.
Small grants and in some cases people are able to run things
that fit within free offerings from services.
So someone said they're blessed to have enough GitHub and Co
Fi donations to cover costs.
Yeah, small grants and then out of pocket and then supported.
Again, if you want to read more of these, you can get
the slides.
I asked what people thought about sort of like small indie infrastructure
in the long term, keeping it going or like what they think
about when they think about winding it down when maybe people start
using it.
So it either has to become too expensive or I get bored
of posting my infra.
Neither are true at the moment.
Or I think if things go well, people like you and Bailey
and others will be able to make a living providing hosting.
We can dream.
Yeah, unless things get massively expensive, then people kind of just want
to keep it online.
Not everybody had optimistic takes here.
Keep stuff running because I have to and it has become somewhat
load-bearing for the ecosystem, was a response.
But people also expressed a lot of thought in how they were
thinking about how people might get off of their services if they
had to wind it down.
So providing like open source codes that people can run it themselves
and it's cheap because it has to be cheap because these
are small-scale operators and trying to make those migration paths exist.
Yeah, I really don't see how developers ever break even or
make money off projects like this and the company is too inconsistent
with who it chooses to fund or how often it funds them.
It was a thought.
I asked what people thought the future of social infrastructure will look
like.
Medium and large-scale community PDSs like Black Sky, North
Sky, Euro Sky.
I would include Bridgie in here, but that came up a
lot.
I think people really do see that as the way it's
going to go.
Personally, I think we're also going to see like a lot
more of people like these dozen or so like independent tiny small-
scale operators as well.
Maybe it'll be more centralized, more mindless.
Maybe I'll be wrong.
Yeah.
How could communities or companies better support came up a little bit.
Some of the coolest things to run that maybe is only at
a prototype stage needs a lot of resources and more than you
might be able to do at like a very small-scale Ind
ieInfra operator.
And so that came up a few times.
Like, is there a way we can kind of pool community resources
to provide that sort of like available infrastructure to try some experiments
that would be driven on that sort of like smaller individual basis?
When I was getting through these, I also realized that like I
have a bunch of people supporting me on GitHub and KoFi
and I've never really like directly asked any of them like, "
Why do you support me?" So I got eight people to reply
to some questions that I sent to people who are supporting folks
running small-scale IndieInfra.
These are in the reverse order.
So what those people, so supporters of small-scale IndieIn
fra think that the future of social infrastructure will look like
more big companies involved in AppProto.
This is all like AppProto.
A mix of software as a service and public services.
I'm pretty hopeful about that one and optimistic.
We have some examples that people pointed to like Debian, Wik
imedia, a couple others that I forgot to put on here.
And yeah, people don't think there will be a future where
social Infra isn't free for the public to use.
I think that's not disproven so far by App
Proto.
And yeah, shout out to QuickSlice, where you can run
your own backend, self-host, pull in just what you need from
the big network, if that's what you're trying to do.
Laptops with batteries, with swelling batteries,
yet handle 1000+ concurrent users just fine.
I think this came from like the theme of we can just
make things more cheap by putting effort into making them efficient, as
we've seen by small-scale operators in AppProto.
So from the funders' perspective, supporting small-scale people, thinking about
the future and winding it down, I really like this one.
Not on my watch.
As it expands, financial sustainability might become more challenging, but due to
the immense benefits it provides, I'm optimistic that solutions can be
found.
I kind of feel this way too.
I think as the whole network grows, the resources of everybody to
support small-scale things also grows.
Probably there will be some business models or some donation-based nonprofits
that can support what's needed in the long term.
But yeah.
And some people feel comfortable donating right now, but don't know
how long that will be the case for themselves or others.
So again, mixed, it's not all like pure optimism around this,
but I think everybody is like kind of, I would say, guarded
optimism or cautious for the most part.
Open-sourced.
And I think like we talk about the permissionlessness of App
Proto a lot as well.
And yeah, what ends up critical will be replaced if needed.
Um, because this is a really small-scale operations and you can
just replace it.
I'm trying really hard not to say you can just do
things.
Why do people support
public infra?
The biggest one was that they were in a position to be
able to do it.
Um, they want to see the atmosphere succeed, and they think that
very small-scale operators are a part of that.
Um, the option to self-host came up a lot.
Um, just the fact that you can do that for these different
components like PDS, of course, but not just the PDS.
Um, it provides that kind of assurance that people want.
Um, this one was cool.
Like, I might not be using most of the services I sponsor
for, but I know others are and may not be able to
sponsor it themselves.
Like, I would say even more than the people running, uh, infrastructure,
the responses from people funding it were like really this kind of,
uh, beautiful, um, community-oriented sentiments around just, like, supporting the ecosystem.
Um, this came up a lot.
It's important to support maintainers of projects I build on,
especially when those projects aren't backed by huge companies.
Uh, yeah, I would say more than that, more of that.
Um, and I'm going to close it on this quote, which
I liked, uh, more community-led than big business-led.
I think this is like a high bar to aim for, but,
um, I, I think we can try.
Do you want to use "we can just try" as an alternate?
Uh, we have a couple minutes before lunch.
Does anyone have a question for fake?
Um, with Constellation, what was the weirdest thing somebody did
about it?
Oh, gosh.
I think I know the answer, but I'm not sure.
So, the question was, what's the weirdest thing somebody has done
with Constellation?
Um, I should have prepared something for this, because people have done
some really weird things with Constellation.
Um, I really love the kind of experiments people do, like Sp
ore's Garden was neat.
Um, I think one of the just surprising ones that other people
think of was Bailey's, uh, hooked up his, uh, badge with
the e-ink screen on it to both show the QR code
for meet me, you and me at, um, but then Bailey presses
another button, and it shows all the people that Bailey's connected
with, and it queries that through Constellation, uh, and like,
yeah, wild.
So, but I want to hear what you thought was the weirdest.
I'm remembering when Aviva and I were doing Deck V
ulture and figuring out, okay, no, we can do Scryful
URIs.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
People, people often say, hey, you should also index URLs, not just
at URIs.
And Constellation has, from day one, it indexes anything
that looks like a, a did, or an at URI, or
any URI that parses like a URI.
So, um, if you want to see all the posts to your
leaflet that are shared on Blue Sky as, like, link embed
s, you can do that.
And it also means you can hack the system by, uh, putting,
like, your own URI scheme, um, that you invent, and just,
like, create links that aren't real links, but Constellation
aggregates them for you, so then you can query it.
You can do, kind of, like, arbitrary, uh, group, grouping and aggreg
ation with Constellation that way.
Yeah, that's a good one.
Any more questions?
I'm just going to add one more thing on the end
of that, which is, sometimes, um, people use Constellation in
ways that aren't scalable, uh, like, trying to use it as
a leaderboard, um, by having every score link to a URL,
and then doing a lot of client-side filtering, and I think
that's awesome.
It won't scale forever, but if you're ever wondering, like,
is it okay if I can use Constellation for this,
um, it's indexing everything that happens on Blue Sky, so
it can handle it.
Like, whatever you're thinking about throwing at it, uh, yeah, just
go for it.
Amazing.
Thank you so much.